Analysis of time-series
For all time-series experiments, data were collected at 2 minute intervals and were normalized by dividing each replicate by its value at the 6 minute time point. For triplicate experiments, conditions were compared to the 0 cp/µl negative control at each time point using a one-tailed Welch's unequal variances t-test. Time points where the experimental condition was significantly above the background were identified using the Benjamini-Hochberg method (cite: 1. Y. Benjamini, Y. Hochberg, Controlling the False Discovery Rate: A Practical and Powerful Approach to Multiple Testing. J. R. Stat. Soc. Series B Stat. Methodol. 57, 289–300 (1995).) with a 5% false discovery rate applied to all of the time points from a single time-series. This allowed reduction of the potential type 1 error associated with repeated testing at each point in the time-series and is at least as stringent as a p-value cutoff of 0.05. The time to detection was identified as the first time point that was significantly above the background as we observed that once a time-series had significantly diverged from the background the difference remained significant for the rest of the time we measured (see supplemental figure ?? -  the significance heat map one). For 20 replicate Limit-Of-Detection experiments replicates could not be averaged because it was important to determine if individual replicates could be distinguished from background. Samples were prepared and analyzed in batches of 10 with 5 experimental samples and 5 0 cp/µl negative controls. Analysis was performed at the (14 or 16), 30, 60, and 118 minute time points. At each of these time points the mean and standard deviation of the 0 cp/µl negative controls within each batch were determined and used to fit a normal distribution. The distribution of negative results was then used to calculate the probability of seeing a point as high or higher than each experimental sample using the survival function of the normal distribution. This value is equivalent to a one-tailed p-value that associated with the null hypothesis that the experimental sample is not higher than the 0 cp/µl negative control. The results are displayed as the fraction of experimental samples out of the total 20 that could be distinguished from the negative control using 3 different p-value cutoffs 0.05, 0.01, 0.001. These cutoffs represent an expected 5%, 1%, and 0.1% false positive rate respectively. We did not multiple hypothesis correct this analysis because we wanted to mirror the analysis that would be performed in a clinical setting, where an individual's sample would not be corrected based on the number of samples run but where type 1 error (false positive rate) would instead be controlled by setting an appropriate p-value cutoff. 